- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast,
where we discuss science
and science-based tools
for everyday life.
[upbeat music]
I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm
a Professor of Neurobiology
and Ophthalmology at
Stanford School of Medicine.
Today my guest is Dr. David Berson,
Professor of Medical Science,
Neurobiology and Ophthalmology
at Brown University.
Dr. Berson's laboratory is credited
with discovering the cells in the eye
that set your circadian rhythms.
These are the so-called intrinsically
photosensitive melanopsin cells.
And while that's a mouthful,
all you need to know for sake
of this introduction is that,
those are the cells that
inform your brain and body
about the time of day.
Dr. Berson's laboratory has also made
a number of other important discoveries
about how we convert our
perceptions of the outside world
into motor action.
More personally, Dr. Berson
has been my go-to resource
for all things neuroscience
for nearly two decades.
I knew of his reputation
as a spectacular researcher
for a long period of time.
And then many years ago, I cold
called him out of the blue,
I basically corralled him
into a long conversation
over the phone after which
he invited me out to Brown
and we've been discussing neuroscience
and how the brain works and
the emerging new technologies
and the emerging new
concepts in neuroscience
for a very long time now.
You're going to realize today
why Dr. Berson is my go-to source.
He has an exceptionally
clear and organized view
of how the nervous system works.
There are many many parts
of the nervous system,
different nuclei and connections
and circuits and chemicals
and so forth, but it takes
a special kind of person
to be able to organize that
information into a structured
and logical framework that
can allow us to make sense
of how we function in
terms of what we feel,
what we experience, how
we move through the world.
Dr. Berson is truly one
of a kind in his ability
to synthesize and organize and
communicate that information.
And I give him credit
as one of my mentors,
and one of the people that I respect most
in the field of science and
medical science generally.
Today Dr. Berson takes us on a journey
from the periphery of the nervous system,
meaning from the outside,
deep into the nervous
system layer by layer,
structure by structure, circuit by circuit
making clear to us
how each of these individual circuits work
and how they work together as a whole.
It's a really magnificent description
that you simply cannot
get from any textbook,
from any popular book and
frankly, as far as I know,
from any podcast that
currently exists out there.
So it's a real gift to
have this opportunity
to learn from Dr. Berson.
Again, I consider him my
mentor in the field of learning
and teaching neuroscience,
and I'm excited for you to learn from him.
One thing is for certain,
by the end of this podcast,
you will know far more about
how your nervous system works
than the vast majority of people out there
including many expert
biologists and neuroscientists.
Before we begin, I'd like to
emphasize that this podcast
is separate from my teaching
and research roles at Stanford.
It is however part of my desire and effort
to bring zero-cost to consumer
information about science,
and science-related tools
to the general public.
In keeping with that theme,
I'd like to thank the
sponsors of today's podcast.
Our first sponsor is Athletic Greens.
Athletic Greens is an all-in-one
vitamin mineral probiotic drink.
I've been taking Athletic
Greens every day since 2012.
So I'm delighted that they're
sponsoring the podcast.
The reason I started
taking Athletic Greens
and the reason I still take
Athletic Greens is that,
it covers all of my vitamin
mineral and probiotic needs.
Nowadays there's a lot of data out there
pointing to the fact that
a healthy gut microbiome
literally, little microbes
that live in our gut,
that are good for us
is important to support
our immune system, our nervous
system, our endocrine system,
and various aspects of our
immediate and long-term health.
With Athletic Greens I get
all the vitamins and minerals
that I need plus the probiotics
ensure a healthy gut microbiome.
It also tastes really good, I
mix mine up with some water,
a little bit of lemon juice,
I'll have that early in the day
and sometimes a second time
later in the day as well.
It's compatible with intermittent fasting,
it's compatible with vegan
diets, with keto diets,
and essentially every diet
that you could possibly imagine out there.
It's also filled with
adaptogens for recovery,
it has digestive enzymes for gut health,
and has a number of other things
that support the immune system.
If you'd like to try Athletic Greens,
you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman
to claim their special offer.
They'll give you five free travel packs
that make it really easy
to mix up Athletic Greens
while you're on the road,
and they'll give you a year's
supply of vitamin D3K2.
There's now a lot of
evidence that vitamin D3
supports a huge number
of metabolic factors,
immune system factors, endocrine factors,
basically, we need vitamin D3,
we can get it from the sun,
but many people are
deficient in vitamin D3
even if they are getting
what they think is sufficient sunlight.
And K2 is important for
cardiovascular health.
So again, if you go to
athleticgreens.com/huberman,
you can claim their special offer,
the five free travel packs,
plus the year supply of vitamin D3K2.
Today's podcast is also
brought to us by InsideTracker.
InsideTracker is a
personalized nutrition platform
that analyzes data from your blood and DNA
to help you better understand your body
and help you reach your health goals.
I've long been a believer in
getting regular blood work done
for the simple reason
that many of the factors
that impact your immediate
and long-term health
can only be analyzed from
a quality blood test.
And now with the advent
of modern DNA tests,
you can also get information
about how your specific genes
are impacting your immediate
and long-term health.
Now a problem with a lot of blood tests
and DNA tests out there,
is you get the numbers back
but you don't know what
to do with those numbers,
with InsideTracker they make
it very simple to figure out
what to do to bring those
numbers into the ranges
that are right for you.
They have a dashboard
that's very easy to use,
you can see the numbers from
your blood and/or DNA tests,
and it will point to
specific lifestyle factors,
nutritional factors as
well as supplementation
maybe even prescription factors
that would be right for you
to bring the numbers
into range that are ideal
for your immediate and
long-term health goals.
Another feature the InsideTracker has
is their inner age test.
This test shows you what
your biological age is
and compares that to
your chronological age
and what you can do to
improve your biological age,
which of course is the important number.
If you'd like to try InsideTracker
you can visit insidetracker.com/huberman
to get 25% off any of
InsideTracker's plans.
Also an interview I did with
Longevity Research Doctor
and InsideTracker's
Founder Dr. Gil Blander,
is out now on their podcast,
the longevity by design podcast
and a link to that interview
can be found in today's show notes.
Today's episode is also
brought to us by Magic Spoon.
Magic Spoon is a zero sugar, grain-free,
keto-friendly cereal.
I don't follow a ketogenic diet.
The way that I eat is basically geared
toward feeling alert
when I want to be alert
and feeling sleepy when
I want to go to sleep.
Which for me means fasting
until about 11:00 am or noon
most days, then I eat
low carb during the day.
So I'll have some meat or
fish or chicken and some salad
that's what works for
me, and in the afternoon,
I remain on a more or
less low carb-ish diet,
and then in the evening, I eat
pastas and things primarily
and I throttle back on the protein
and that's what allows me
to fall asleep at night.
That's just what works for me.
So if I want a snack in the afternoon,
I want that to be a
ketogenic or low carb snack
and that snack these days is Magic Spoon.
Magic Spoon is really terrific,
it has zero grams of sugar,
13 to 14 grams of protein,
and only four net grams of
carbohydrates in each serving.
It's really delicious,
they have a number of
different flavors like cocoa,
fruity, peanut butter and frosted,
I particularly like frosted.
It tastes like donuts
and I really like donuts
although I try not to eat
donuts too often if ever.
What I do lately, is I take Magic Spoon,
I put it in some Bulgarian
yogurt which is really good
and I mix that up, I put those in there
and sometimes I put some cinnamon on them.
And as I'm describing this,
I'm getting hungry for Magic Spoon.
So if you want to try Magic Spoon,
you can go to magicspoon.com/huberman
to get their variety pack.
Just use the promo code
Huberman at checkout
to get $5 off your order.
Again, that's magicspoon.com/huberman
and use the code Huberman to get $5 off.
And now for my discussion with
Dr. David Berson, welcome.
- Thank you.
- Yeah.
- So nice to be here.
- Great to have you.
For more than 20 years
you've been my go-to source
for all things, nervous
system how it works,
how it's structured.
So today I want to ask you
some questions about that.
I think people would gain a lot
of insight into this machine
that makes them think and
feel and see, et cetera.
If you would, could
you tell us how we see?
A photon of light enters
the eye, what happens?
- Right.
- How is it that I look
outside, I see a truck drive by,
or I look on the wall I
see a photo of my dog,
how does that work?
- Right, so this is an
old question obviously.
And clearly in the end,
the reason you have a visual experience
is that your brain is got
some pattern of activity
that associates with the
input from the periphery.
But you can have a visual experience
with no input from the periphery as well.
When you're dreaming, you're seeing things
that aren't coming through your eyes.
- Are those memories?
- I would say in a sense
they may reflect your visual experience
they're not necessarily
specific visual memories,
but of course they can be.
But the point is, that
the experience of seeing
is actually a brain phenomenon.
But of course, under normal circumstances,
we see the world because
we're looking at it
and we're using our eyes to look at it.
And fundamentally, when we're
looking at the exterior world,
it's what the retina is
telling the brain that matters.
So there are cells called ganglion cells,
these are neurons that are the
key cells for communicating
between eye and brain, the
eye is like the camera,
it's detecting the initial image,
doing some initial processing,
and then that signal gets
sent back to the brain proper
and of course, it's there
at the level of the cortex
that we have this conscious
visual experience.
There are many other places in the brain
that get visual input as
well doing other things
with that kind of information.
- So I get a lot of
questions about color vision.
If you would, could you explain
how is it that we can perceive
reds and greens and blues
and things of that sort.
- Right, so the first thing
to understand about light,
is that it's just a form of
electromagnetic radiation,
it's vibrating, it's oscillating, but.
- When you say it's
vibrating, it's oscillating,
you mean that photons are actually moving?
- Well in a sense, photons
they're certainly moving
through space, we think
about photons as particles
and that's one way of
thinking about light,
but we can also think of it
as a wave like a radio wave,
either way is acceptable.
And the radio waves have frequencies
like the frequencies
on the your radio dial,
and certain frequencies in
the electromagnetic spectrum
can be detected by neurons in the retina,
those are the things we see,
but there's still different
wavelengths within the light
that can be seen by the eye.
And those different wavelengths
are unpacked in a sense
or decoded by the nervous system
to lead to our experience of color.
Essentially, different
wavelengths give us the sensation
of different colors through the auspices
of different neurons that are tuned
to different wavelengths of light.
- So when a photon, so
when a little bit of light
hits my eye goes in,
the photoreceptors convert
that into electrical signal?
- Right.
- How is it that a given photon of light
gives me the perception eventually,
leads the perception of red
versus green versus blue?
- Right, so if you imagine
that in the first layer
of the retina where this
transformation occurs
from electromagnetic
radiation into neural signals
that you have different
kinds of sensitive cells
that are expressing, they're
making different molecules
within themselves for this express purpose
of absorbing photons
which is the first step
in the process of seeing, now
it turns out that altogether,
there are about five proteins like this
that we need to think about
in the typical retina,
but for seeing color
really it's three of them.
So they're three different proteins,
each absorbs light with a
different preferred frequency,
and then the nervous system
keeps track of those signals
compares and contrasts them
to extract some understanding
of the wavelength composition of light.
So you can see just by
looking at a landscape,
or it must be late in the day
because things are looking golden
that's all a function of
our absorbing the light
that's coming from the world
and interpreting that with our brain
because of the different
composition of the light
that's reaching our eyes.
- Is it fair to assume
that my perception of red
is the same as your perception of red?
- Well, that's a great question.
- And that mine is better?
I'm just kidding, I'm just kidding.
[laughs]
- It's a great question, it's
a deep philosophical question.
It's a question that really
probably can't even ultimately
be answered by the usual
empirical scientific processes,
'cause it's really about
an individual's experience.
What we can say is that
the biological mechanisms
that we think are important
for seeing color for example,
seem to be very highly similar
from one individual to the next
whether it be human beings,
or other animals.
And so we think that the
physiological process
looks very similar on the front end,
but once you're at the level
of perception or understanding
or experience, that's something
that's a little bit tougher
to nail down with the sorts
of scientific approaches
that we approach biological
vision let's say.
- You mentioned that there
are five different cone types
essentially, the cones being
the cells that absorb light
of different wavelengths.
I often wondered when I had my dog,
what he saw and how his vision
differs from our vision.
And certainly, there are
animals that can see things
that we can't see.
- Right?
- What are some of the more
outrageous examples of that?
- I've seen things.
- And same things in the extreme.
- Right.
- Dogs I'm guessing see reds
more as oranges, is that right?
'Cause they don't have the
same array of of neurons
that we have for seeing color.
- Right, so the first thing is,
it's not really five types of colons,
there are really three types of colons.
And if you look at the
way that color vision
is thought to work, you can sort of see
that it has to be three different signals.
There are a couple of
other types of pigments.
One is really mostly for dim light vision.
When you're walking
around in a moonless night
and you're seeing things
with very low light
that's the rod cell that
uses its own pigment.
And then there's another class of pigments
we'll probably talk
about a little bit later,
this melanopsin pigment.
- I thought you were
referring to like ultraviolet
and infrared and things like that.
- Right, so in the case of a typical,
well, let's put it this way.
In human beings, most of
us have three cone types
and we can see colors that stem from that.
In most mammals including
your dog or your cat,
there really are only two cone types
and that limits the kind of
vision that they can have
in the domain of wavelength
or color as you would say.
So really, a dog sees the
world kind of like a particular
kind of color blind human
might see the world,
because instead of having
three channels to compare
and contrast they only have two channels
and that makes it much more
difficult to figure out exactly
which wavelength you're looking at.
- Do colorblind people
suffer much as a consequence
of being colorblind?
- Well, it's like so
many other disabilities.
The world is built for people
of the most common type.
So in some cases, the
expectation can be there
that somebody can see something
that they won't be able to
if they're missing one of
their cone types let's say.
So in those moments, that
can be a real problem.
If there's a lack of contrast
to their visual system,
they will be blind to that.
In general, it's a fairly
modest visual limitation
as things go.
For example, if not
being able to see acutely
can be much more damaging,
not being able to read
fine print for example.
- Yeah, I suppose if I had to give up
the ability to see certain colors
or give up the ability to see clearly,
I could certainly trade
out color for clarity.
- Right, of course, color
is very meaningful to us
as human beings, so we
would hate to give it up.
But obviously, dogs and cats
and all kinds of other mammals
do perfectly well in the world.
- Yeah, because we take care of them.
I spent most of my time
taking care of that dog.
- He took care of me too.
Let's talk about that odd photopigment.
Photopigment of course being
the thing that absorbs light
of a particular wavelength,
and let's talk about these
specialized ganglion cells
that communicate certain
types of information
from eye to the brain
that are so important
for so many things.
What I'm referring to here of course is,
your co-discovery of the so-called
intrinsically photosensitive cells,
the neurons in the eye that
do so many of the things
that don't actually have
to do with perception,
but have to do with important
biological functions.
What I would love for you to do
is explain to me why once I heard you say
we have a bit of fly eye in our eye.
- Yeah.
- And you showed this slide
of a giant fly from a horror movie.
- Yeah.
- Trying to attack this woman.
- And maybe it was an eye also.
So what does it mean that
we have a bit of a fly eye
in our eye?
- Yeah, so this last pigment
is a really peculiar one.
One can think about it
as really the initial
sensitive element in a system
that's designed to tell your brain
about how bright things are in your world.
And the thing that's really
peculiar about this pigment,
is that it's in the
wrong place in a sense.
When you think about the
structure of the retina,
you think about a layer cake essentially.
You've got this thin membrane
at the back of your eye,
but it's actually a stack of thin layers
and the outermost of those layers
is where these photoreceptors
you were talking about
earlier are sitting.
That's where the film of
your camera is essentially,
that's where the photons do their magic
with the photo pigments and
turn it into a neural signal.
- I like that I've never really thought
of the photoreceptors is
the film of the camera,
but that makes sense.
- Or like the sensitive chip
on CCD chip in your cell phone.
It's the surface on which
the light pattern is imaged
by the optics of the eye,
and now you've got an array of sensors
that's capturing that information
and creating a bitmap essentially,
but now it's in neural signals
distributed across the
surface of the retina.
So all of that was known to
be going on 150 years ago,
a couple of types of
photoreceptors cones and rods.
If you look a little bit more closely,
three types of cones, that's
where the transformation
from electromagnetic
radiation to neural signals
was thought to take place.
But it turns out that
this last photopigment
is in the other end of the retina,
the innermost part of the retina,
that's where the so-called
ganglion cells are.
Those are the cells
that talk to the brain,
the ones that actually
can communicate directly
what information comes to
them from the photoreceptors.
And here you've got a case where actually,
some of the output neurons
that we didn't think had any business
being directly sensitive to light
were actually making this
photopigment, absorbing light,
and converting that to neural signals
and sending it to the brain.
So that made it pretty
surprising and unexpected,
but there are many surprising
things about these cells.
- So, and what is the
relationship to the fly eye?
- Right, so the link there is,
that if you ask how the photopigment
now communicates downstream
from the initial absorption event
to get to the electrical signal,
that's a complex cellular process
involves many chemical steps.
And if you look at how
photoreceptors in our eyes work,
you can see what that cascade
is, how that chain works.
If you look in the eyes
of flies or other insects
or other invertebrates,
there's a very similar kind of chain.
But the specifics of how the signals
get from the absorption
event by the pigment
to the electrical response
that the nervous system can understand,
are characteristically different
between fuzzy furry creatures like us
and insects for example like the fly.
- I see.
- So these funny extra photoreceptors
that are in the wrong layer
doing something completely different
are actually using a chemical cascade
that looks much more
like what you would see
in a fly photoreceptor,
than what you would see
in a human photoreceptor,
a rod or a cone for example.
So it sounds like it's a very
primitive aspect of biology
that we maintain.
- Exactly right, exactly.
- And despite the fact that
dogs can't see as many colors
as we can and cats can't see
as many colors as we can,
we have all this extravagant
stuff for seeing color
and then you got this other pigment
sitting in the wrong not wrong,
but in a different part of the eye
sending processing light very differently.
- Right.
- And sending that
information into the brain.
So, what do these cells do?
Presumably, they're there for a reason.
- They are, and the
interesting thing is that,
one cell type like this
carrying one kind of signal
which I would call a
brightness signal essentially,
can do many things in the brain.
- When you say brightness
signal you mean that,
like right now, I have these
cells do I have these cells?
Of course.
- You do.
- I'm joking, I hope I
have these cells in my eye.
And they're paying attention
to how bright it is overall,
but they're not paying attention
for instance to the edge of area
or what else is going on in the room.
- Right, so it's the difference
between knowing what the
objects are on the table
and knowing whether it's bright enough
to be daylight right now.
So why does your nervous
system need to know
whether it's daylight right now?
Well, one thing that needs to know
that is your circadian clock.
If you travel across time zones to Europe,
now your internal clock
thinks it's California time,
but the rotation of the earth
is for different part of the planet.
The rising and setting of the sun
is not at all what your
body is anticipating.
So you've got an internal representation
of the rotation of the
earth in your own brain,
that's your circadian
system it's keeping time.
But now you've played a
trick on your nervous system,
you put yourself in a different place
where the sun is rising
at the quote wrong time.
Well, that's not good for you, right?
So you got to get back on track.
One of the things this system does,
is sends a oh, it's daylight
now signal to the brain,
which compares with its internal clock.
And if that's not right, it
tweaks the clock gradually
until you get over your jet lag
and you feel back on track again.
- So the jet lag case
makes a lot of sense to me,
but presumably, these elements
didn't evolve for jet lag.
- Right.
- So, what are they doing
on a day-to-day basis?
- Right, well one way to
think about this is that,
the clock that you have
in not just your brain,
in all the cells, almost all
of the cells of your body,
they're all oscillating, they're all.
- They got local little clocks in them.
- They got local little
clocks in themselves,
they're all clocks.
They need to be
synchronized appropriately,
and the whole thing has to be
built in biological machinery.
This is actually a beautiful
story about how gene expression
can control gene expression,
and if you set it up right,
you can set up a little thing
that just sort of hums along
at a particular frequency.
In our case it's humming
along at 24 hours,
'cause that's how our earth rotates
and it's all built into our biology.
So this is great, but the reality is,
that the clock can only be so good.
I mean, we're talking about biology here.
It's not precision engineering,
and so it can be a little bit off.
- Well, also it's in our brain,
so it doesn't have access to
any regular unerring signal?
- Well, if in the absence of the rising
and setting of the sun it doesn't,
if you put someone in a cave,
their biological clock will keep time
to within a handful of
minutes of 24 hours,
that's no problem for one day.
But if this went on
without any correction,
eventually you'd be out of phase
and this is actually one of the things
that blind patients often complain about.
If they've got retinal
blindness is insomnia.
[indistinct]
Exactly, they're not synchronized,
their clock is there,
but they're drifting out of phase
because their clock's only good
to 24.2 hours or 23.8 hours
little by little if they're drifting.
So you need a synchronization signal.
So even if you never across time zones
and of course we didn't
back on the Savannah
we stayed within walking
distance of where we were,
you still need a synchronizer,
'cause otherwise,
you have nothing to actually confirm
when the rising and the
setting of the sun is,
that's what you're trying
to synchronize yourself to.
- I'm fascinated by the circadian clock
and the fact that all
the cells of our body
have essentially a
24-hour-ish clock in them.
- Right.
- We hear a lot about
these circadian rhythms
and circadian clocks the
fact that we need light input
from these special neurons
in order to set the clock.
But I've never really heard it described
how the clock itself works
and how the clock signals
to all the rest of the body
when the liver should be doing one thing
and the stomach should be doing another.
I know you've done some work on the clock.
So if you would just
maybe briefly describe
where the clock is, what it does,
and some of the top contour
of how it tells the cells
of the body what to do.
- Right, so the first thing
to say is that, as you said,
the clock is all over the place.
Most of the tissues in
your body have clocks.
- We probably have what,
millions of clocks in our body.
- Yeah, I would say that's probably fair.
If you have millions of cell types,
you might have millions of clocks.
The role of the central pacemaker
for the circadian system
is to coordinate all of these.
And there's a little nucleus,
a little collection of
nerve cells in your brain
it's called the suprachiasmatic
nucleus the SCN,
and it is sitting in a funny place
for the rest of the structures
in the nervous system
that get direct retinal input.
It's sitting in the hypothalamus,
which you can think about as
sort of the great coordinator
of drives and.
- The source of all our
pleasures and all our problems.
- Right.
- Or most our problems.
- Yes, it really is.
But it's sort of deep in your brain
things that drive you to do things.
If you're freezing cold, you
put on a coat, you shiver,
all these things are
coordinated by hypothalamus.
So this pathway that we're
talking about from the retina
and from these peculiar cells
that are encoding light intensity,
are sending signals directly into a center
that's surrounded by all of these centers
that control autonomic nervous system
and your hormonal systems.
So this is a part of your visual system
that doesn't really reach
the level of consciousness,
it's not something you think about,
it's happening under the
radar kind of all the time
and the signal is working its way
into this central clock
coordinating center.
Now what happens then is
not that well understood,
but it's clear that
this is a neural center
that has the same ability to communicate
with other parts of your brain
as any other neural center.
And clearly, there are circuits
that involve connections
between neurons that are conventional.
But in addition, it's quite clear
that there are also
sort of humeral effects
that things are being oozing
out of the cells in the center
and maybe into the circulation
or just diffusing through
the brain to some extent
that can also affect neurons elsewhere.
But the hypothalamus uses everything
to control the rest of the body.
And that's true, the supracosmetic nucleus
this circadian center as well,
it can get its fingers into
the autonomic nervous system,
the humeral system and of
course, up to the centers
of the brain that organize
coordinated rational behavior.
So if I understand correctly,
we have this group of cells,
the suprachiasmatic nucleus,
it's got a 24-hour rhythm,
that rhythm is more or less matched
to what's going on in our external world
by the specialized set
of neurons in our eye.
But then the master clock itself the SCN,
releases things in the
blood humeral signals
that go out various places in the body.
And you said to the autonomic system
which is regulating more or
less how alert or calm we are,
as well as our thinking and our cognition.
So I'd love to talk to you
about the autonomic part,
presumably that's through melatonin,
it's through adrenaline
how is it that this clock
is impacting how the autonomic system,
how alert or calm we feel?
- Right, so there are pathways
by which the suprachiasmatic
nucleus can access
both the parasympathetic and
sympathetic nervous system.
- Just so people know the
sympathetic nervous system
is the one that tends
to make us more alert,
and the parasympathetic nervous system
is the portion of the
autonomic nervous system
makes us feel more calm.
- Right.
- In broadcasting.
Right, to first approximation, right?
So, this is both of these systems
are within the grasp
of the circadian system
through hypothalamic circuits.
One of the circuits that will be I think,
of particular interest
to some of your listeners
is a pathway that involves
this sympathetic branch
of the autonomic nervous system
the fight or flight system
that is actually through
a very circuitous route
innervating the pineal gland
which is sitting in the
middle of your brain.
- The so-called third eye.
- Right, so this is.
- We'll have to get back to
why it's called the third eye,
because, yeah.
- That's an interesting thing.
- You can't call something
the third eye and just.
- Just leave it there.
- Right.
- Anyway, this is the
major source of melatonin
in your body.
- So light comes in to my eye.
- Yes.
- Passed off to the
suprachiasmatic nucleus
essentially, not the light itself,
but the signal representing the light.
- Sure.
- Then the SCN, the
suprachiasmatic nucleus
can impact the melatonin system.
- Right.
- Via the pineal?
- Right, the way this is seen is that,
if you were to measure
your melatonin level
over the course of the day,
if you could do this hour by hour,
you'd see that it's
really low during the day,
very high at night.
But if you get up in
the middle of the night
and go to the bathroom
and turn on the bright
full fluorescent light,
your melatonin level is
slammed to the floor.
Light is directly impacting
your hormonal levels
through this mechanism
that we just described.
So this is one of the routes
by which light can act
on your hormonal status
through pathways that
are completely beyond
what you normally would
think about, right?
You're thinking about the
things in the bathroom.
Oh, there's the toothbrush,
there's the tube of toothpaste.
But meanwhile, this other
system is just counting photons
and saying oh wow, there's
a lot of photons right now
let's shut down the melatonin release.
- This is one of the main reasons
why I've encouraged people
to avoid bright light exposure
in the middle of the night.
Not just blue light, but
bright light of any wavelength,
because there's this myth
out there that blue light
because it's the optimal signal
for activating this pathway
and shutting down melatonin,
is the only wavelength of
light that can shut it down.
But am I correct in thinking that
if a light is bright enough.
- Right.
- It doesn't matter if it's
blue light, green light,
purple light, even red light.
- Right.
- You're going to slam
melatonin down to the ground
which is not a good thing to happen
in the middle of the night.
- Right.
- Correct?
Right, yeah, any light
will affect the system
to some extent, the blue light
is somewhat more effective,
but don't fool yourself into thinking
that if you use red light
that means you're avoiding the effect,
it's certainly still there.
And certainly, if it's very bright,
it'll be more effective
in driving the system
than dim blue light would be.
- Interesting, a lot of
people wear blue blockers.
- Right.
- And in a kind of odd twist
of misinformation out there,
a lot of people wear blue blockers
during the middle of the day,
which basically makes no sense
because during the middle of the day
is when you want to get
a lot of bright light
and including blue light
into your eyes, correct?
- Absolutely, and not just for the reasons
we've been talking about in
terms of circadian effects,
there are major effects of light on mood.
And seasonal affective
disorder apparently,
is essentially a reflection of
this same system in reverse.
If you're living in the northern climes
and you're not getting that much light
during the middle of
the winter in Stockholm,
you might be prone to depression
and phototherapy might be
just the ticket for you
and that's because there's a
direct effect of light on mood,
there's an example where if
you don't have enough light
it's a problem.
So I think you're exactly right.
It's not about is like
good or bad for you,
it's about what kind of light and when
that makes the difference.
Yeah, the general rule of
thumb that I've been living by,
is to get as much bright light in my eyes
ideally from sunlight
anytime I want to be alert.
- Right.
- And doing exactly the opposite
when I want to be asleep.
- Yeah.
- We're getting drowsy.
- And there are aspects
of this that spin out
way beyond the conversation
we're having now
to things like this.
It turns out that the incidence of myopia.
- Nearsightedness.
- Nearsightedness, right.
Is strongly related to the amount of time
that kids spend outdoors.
- In what direction of effect?
- The more they spend time outdoors,
the less nearsightedness they have.
- So this is not because
they're viewing things
at a distance,
or because they're getting a
lot of blue light, sunlight?
- It's a great question,
it is not fully resolved
what the epidemiological,
what the basis of that
epidemiological finding is,
one possibility is the amount of light
which would make me think
about this melanopsin system again.
But it might very well be
a question of accommodation
that is the process by which
you focus on near or far things
if you're never outdoors,
everything is nearby.
If you're outdoors, you're
focusing far, so this is.
- Or unless you are on your phone?
- Right, exactly.
- There's a tremendous
amount of interest these days
in watches and things that count steps.
I'm beginning to realize
that we should probably have a
device that can count photons
during the day.
- Right.
- And can also count photons at night
and tell us hey, you're
getting too many photons,
you're going to shut down
your melatonin at night,
or you're not getting enough photons,
today you didn't get enough bright light,
whether or not it's from
artificial light or from sunlight.
I guess that, where would you put?
I guess you put on the top of your head
or you'd probably want it
someplace outward facing?
- Right, probably what you
need is as many photons
over as much of the retina as possible
to recruit as much of
the system as possible.
- In thinking about other effects
of this non-image forming pathway
that involves these special
cells in the eye and the SCN,
you had a paper a few years ago
looking at retinal input
to an area of the brain
which has a fancy name the peri-habenular,
but names don't necessarily matter
that had some important effects on mood
and other aspects of light.
Maybe you could tell us a little bit
about what is the peri-habenular?
- Oh, wow, so that's a fancy term,
but I think the way to think about this,
is a chunk of the brain
that is sitting as part of a bigger chunk
that's really the linker
between peripheral sensory input
of all kinds, virtually all kinds,
whether it's auditory
input or tactile input
or visual input to the region
of your brain the cortex
that allows you to
think about these things
and make plans around
them and to integrate them
and that kind of thing.
So, we've known about a pathway
that gets from the retina through
this sort of linker center
which it's called the thalamus, and then.
[indistinct]
Exactly, but you want to
arrive at the destination.
Right now you're at grand central
and now you can do your thing
'cause you're up at the cortex.
So this is the standard pattern.
You have sensory input
coming from the periphery,
you've got these peripheral elements
that are doing the initial stages of.
- The eye, the ear, the nose.
- Your skin of your fingertips, right?
The taste buds on your tongue
they're taking this raw information in
and they're doing some pre-processing
maybe or the early circuits are.
But eventually, most of these signals
have to pass through the
gateway to the cortex
which is the thalamus.
And we've known for years,
for decades, many decades,
what the major throughput
pathway from the retina
to the cortex is and where it ends up.
It ends up in the visual cortex.
You pat the back of your head
that's where the receiving center is
for the main pathway
from retina to cortex.
But wait a minute, there's more.
There's this little side pathway
that goes through a different part
of that linking thalamus center.
[indistinct]
- Like a local train.
- Yeah.
- From grand central to.
- It's in a weird part of
the neighborhood, right?
It's a completely different,
it's like a little trunk line
that branches off and goes
out into the hinterlands
and it's going to the
part of this linker center
that's talking to a completely
different part of cortex
way up front, frontal lobe,
which is much more involved
in things like planning,
or self-image or.
- Self-image literally, how one.
- Views oneself, do you
feel good about yourself,
or what's your plan for next Thursday.
It's a very high level center
in the highest level
of your nervous system
and this is the region
that is getting input
from this pathway which is
mostly worked out in its function
by [indistinct] Tara's Lab.
I know you had him on the podcast.
- We didn't talk about this path.
- This pathway at all right.
So Dale Fernandez and [indistinct]
and the folks that work with them,
were able to show that this
pathway doesn't just exist
and get you to a weird place.
But if you activate it at
kind of the wrong time of day,
animals can become depressed.
And if you silence it under
the right circumstances,
then weird lighting cycles that
would normally make them act
sort of depressed, no
longer have that effect.
- So it sounds to me like
there's this pathway from eye
to this unusual train
route through the structure
we call the thalamus,
then up to the front of the brain
that relates to things of self-perception,
kind of higher level functions.
I find that really interesting,
because most of what I think about
when I think about these fancy,
well, or these primitive rather,
neurons that don't pay attention
to the shapes of things,
but instead to brightness I think of well,
it regulates melatonin
and circadian clock,
mood, hunger, the really
kind of vegetative stuff
if you will.
- Right.
- And this is interesting
because I think a lot of people
experience depression
not just people that live in Scandinavia
in the middle of winter, and
we are very much divorced
from our normal interactions with light.
It also makes me realize
that these intrinsically
photosensitive cells
that set the clock et cetera,
are involved in a lot of things.
They seem to regulate a dozen
or more different basic functions.
I want to ask you about a different aspect
of the visual system now,
which is the one that relates
to our sense of balance.
So I love boats but I hate being on them.
I love the ocean from shore,
because I get incredibly
seasick, it's awful.
I think I'm going to get seasick
if I think about it too much.
[laughs]
And once I went on a boat trip,
I came back and I actually got
motion sick or wasn't seasick
'cause I was rafting.
So there's a system that
somehow gets messed up.
They always tell us if you're feeling sick
to look at the horizon
et cetera, et cetera.
- Right.
- So what is the link
between our visual system
and our balance system
and why does it make us nauseous sometimes
when the world is moving in a way
that we're not accustomed to?
- Right.
- I realize this is a big question,
because it involves eye
movement, et cetera.
- Right.
- But let's maybe just walk in
at the simplest layers
of vision, vestibular,
so-called balance system
and then maybe we can piece
the system together for people
so that they can understand,
and then also we should
give them some tools
for adjusting their nausea
when their vestibular
system is out of whack.
- Cool, so the first thing to think about
is that the vestibular system
is designed to allow you
to see how your or detect sense
how you're moving in the
world, through the world.
It's a funny one because
it's about your movement
in relationship to the world in a sense,
and yet it's sort of interoceptive
in the sense that it is really
in the end sensing the
movement of your own body.
- Okay, so interoception
we should probably delineate for people
is when you're focusing
on your internal state
as opposed to something outside you.
- Right.
- It's a gravity sensing system.
- Well, it's partly a
gravity sensing system
in the sense that gravity is
a force that's acting on you
as if you were moving through the world
in the opposite direction.
- All right, now you got to explain that.
You got to explain that to me.
- Okay, so basically the idea is that,
if we leave gravity inside,
we're just sitting in a car,
in the passenger seat and the
driver hits the accelerator
and you start moving
forward, you sense that.
If your eyes were closed, you'd sense it.
If your ears were plugged
in, your eyes would close,
you'd still know it.
- Yeah, many people take
off on the plane like this
they're dreading the flight
and they know when the
plane is taking off.
- Sure, that's your
vestibular system talking,
because anything that jostles you out
of the current position
you're in right now
will be detected by the
vestibular system pretty much.
So this is a complicated system,
but it's basically in your inner ear
very close to where you're hearing.
- That they put it there.
And I don't know.
- And I don't really know,
they're sort of derived.
[indistinct]
- Now I'm just kidding.
To steal our friend Russ
Van Gelder's explanation,
we weren't consulted the
design phase and no one.
- That's a great [indistinct].
- But it's interesting it's in the ear.
- Yeah.
- Right?
- Yeah, it's deep in there
and it's served by the same nerve actually
that serves the hearing system.
One way to think about it
is both the hearing system
and this vestibular
self-motion sensing system
are really detecting the signal
in the same way they're hairy
cells and they're exciting.
[indistinct]
- Yeah, sort of they got
little cilia sticking up
off the surfaces.
And depending on which way you bend those,
the cells will either
be inhibited or excited,
they're not even neurons but
then they talk to neurons
with a neuron-like process and off you go.
Now you've got an auditory signal
if you're sensing things
bouncing around in your cochlea
which is.
- Sound waves.
- Sympathetically the
bouncing of your eardrum
which is symmetrically the
sound waves in the world.
But in the case of the
vestibular apparatus,
evolution has built a system
that detects the motion of say
fluid going by those hairs.
And if you put a sensor
like that in a tube
that's fluid filled,
now you've got a sensor
that will be activated
when you rotate that tube around the axis
that passes through the middle of it,
those we're just listening won't be able.
[indistinct]
- I was thinking of it
as three hula hoops.
- Right, three hoops.
- One standing up, one
lying down on the ground.
- Right.
- The other one the other way.
- Three directions, the people who fly
will talk about roll pitch and
you all that kind of thing.
So three axes of encoding
just like in the.
[indistinct]
- Sort of the yes, the no
and then I always say
it's the puppy head tilt.
- Yeah, that puppy tilt.
- That's the other one.
So the point is that,
your brain is eventually
going to be able to unpack
what these sensors are telling you
about how you just rotated your head
in very much the way that
the three types of cones
we were talking about before
are reading the incoming photons
in the wavelength domain
differently, and if.
- Red, green, blue.
- Yeah, you can compare and
trust you get red, green, blue.
So same basic idea if
you have three sensors
and you array them properly,
now you can tell if you're
rotating your head left or right,
up or down that's the sensory signal
coming back into your brain
confirming that you've just
made a movement that you will.
- But what about on the plane?
Because when I'm on the plane,
I'm completely stationary
the plane's moving.
- Right.
- But my head hasn't moved.
- So I'm just moving
forward, gravity is constant.
- Exactly.
- How do I know I'm accelerating?
- So what's happening now
is your brain is sensing the motion,
and the brain is smart
enough also to ask itself,
did I will that movement or
did that come from the outside?
So now in terms of sort of understanding
what the the vestibular signal means,
it's got to be embedded in the context
of what you tried to do,
or what your other sensory
systems are telling you
about what's happening.
- I see, so it's very interesting.
But it's not conscious or
at least if it's conscious,
it's very not conscious, it's
definitely very fast, right?
The moment that plane starts moving,
I know that I didn't get up out
of my chair and run forward.
- Right.
- But I'm not really thinking about
getting up out of my chair I just know.
- I guess the way i
think about it is that,
the nervous system is
quote, aware at many levels
when it gets all the way up to the cortex
and we're thinking about it,
you're talking about it, that's cortical.
But the lower levels of the brain
that don't require you to
actually actively think about it
they're just doing their thing
are also made aware, right?
A lot of this is happening
under the surface
of what you're thinking,
these are reflexes.
- Okay, so we've got this
gravity sensing system?
- Right.
- I'm nodding for those that are listening
for a yes movement of the head,
a no movement of the head
or the tilting of the head
from side to side.
- Right.
- And then you said that
knowledge about whether or not
activation of that system
comes from my own movements,
or something acting upon
me like the plane moving.
- Right.
- Has to be combined with other signals.
And so, how is the visual information
or information about the visual world
combined with balance information?
- Right, so yeah.
I guess maybe the best way to think about
how these two systems work together,
is to think about what
happens when you suddenly
rotate your head to the left.
When you suddenly rotate
your head to the left,
your eyes are actually
rotating to the right.
Automatically, you do
this in complete darkness.
If you had an infrared
camera and watched yourself
in complete darkness,
you can't see anything.
Rotating your head to the left,
your eyes would rotate to the right.
That's your vestibular system saying,
I'm going to try to compensate
for the head rotation.
So my eyes are still
looking in the same place.
Why is that useful, well,
if it's always doing that,
then the image of the world on your retina
will be pretty stable most of the time
and that actually helps vision.
- Have they built this into
cameras for image stabilization
'cause when I move, when I
take a picture with my phone,
it's blurry, it's not clear?
- Well actually, you might
want to get a better phone,
because now what they have is
software in the better apps
that will do a kind of
image stabilization post-hoc
by doing a registration of the images
that are bouncing around,
they say the edge of the house was here,
so let's get that aligned
in each of your images.
So you may not be aware if
you're using a good new phone
that if you walk around a
landscape and hold your phone,
that there's all this image
stabilization going on.
But it's built into standard
cinematic technology now,
because if we tried to
do a handheld camera,
things would be bouncing around,
things would be unwatchable,
you wouldn't be able to really understand
what's going on in the scene.
So the brain works really hard
to mostly stabilize the image
of the world on your retina
and of course you're
moving through the world
so you can't stabilize everything.
But the more you can
stabilize most of the time,
the better you can see.
And that's why when we're scanning a scene
looking around at things,
we're making very rapid eye movements
for very short periods of
time and then we just rest,
but we're not the only ones that do that.
If you ever watch a hummingbird,
it does exactly the same
thing at a feeder, right?
[indistinct]
It is with its body.
It's going to make a quick movement,
and then it's going to be stable.
And when you watch a pigeon
walking on the sidewalk,
it does this funny head bobbing thing.
But what it's really doing,
is racking its head back on its neck
while its body goes forward
so that the image of the
visual world stays static.
- Is that why they're doing it?
- Yes, and you've seen
the funny chicken videos
on YouTube, right?
- You take a chicken move it up and down
the head stays in one place,
it's all the same thing.
All of these animals are trying hard
to keep the image of the
world stable on their retina
as much of the time as they possibly can.
And then when they've got
to move, make it fast,
make it quick and then stabilize again.
- That's why the pigeons
have their head back?
- It is, yeah.
- Wow.
- Yeah.
- I just need to pause there for a second
and digest that, amazing.
In case people aren't.
Well, there's no reason
why people would know
what we're doing here, but essentially,
what we're doing is we're
building up from sensory
light onto the eye, make
color to what the brain does
with the integration of
that circadian clock,
melatonin, et cetera.
And now what we're doing
is we're talking about
multi-sensory or multimodal
combining one sense vision
with another sense balance.
- Right.
- And it turns out that pigeons
know more about this than I do,
because pigeons know
to keep their head back
as they walk forward.
- Right.
- All right, so that gets us to this issue
of motion sickness.
- Right.
- And you don't have to go out on a boat.
Anytime I go to New York, I sit in an Uber
or in a cab in the back.
And if I'm looking at my phone
while the car is driving,
I feel nauseous by time I
arrive at my destination.
- Right.
- I always try and look out
the front of the windshield,
because I'm told that helps
but it's a little tiny window.
- Right.
- And I end up feeling slightly
less sick if I do that.
So what's going on with the
vision and the balance system
that causes a kind of a nausea?
And actually, if I keep
talking about this.
[indistinct]
[laughs]
I don't throw up easily, but
for some reason motion sickness
is a real thing for me.
- It's a problem for a lot of people.
I think the fundamental problem typically,
when you get motion sick
is what they call visual
vestibular conflict.
That is, you have two sensory systems
that are talking to your brain
about how you're moving through the world.
And as long as they agree you're fine.
So if you're driving,
your body senses that
you're moving forward.
Your vestibular system is picking up
this acceleration of the car,
and your visual system is
seeing the consequences
of forward motion in the
sweeping of the scene past you.
Everything is honky-dory,
right, no problem.
But when you are headed forward
but you're looking at your cell phone,
what is your retina seeing?
Your retina is seeing the
stable image of the screen.
There's absolutely no motion in that.
- Or the motion is just or some
other emotion like a movie.
- If you're playing a game
or you're watching a video,
a football game, the motion is uncoupled
with what's actually
happening to your body.
Your brain doesn't like that,
your brain likes everything to be aligned.
And if it's not, it's
going to complain to you.
- By making me feel nauseous.
- By making you feel nauseous
and maybe you'll change your behavior.
So you're getting.
- I'm getting punished.
- Yeah, for setting it up.
[indistinct]
- Right.
- By the vestibular?
- You'll learn.
- Visuals.
[laughs]
In time, I love it.
I love the idea of reward signals
and we've done a lot of
discussion about this
on this podcast of things like
dopamine reward and things,
but also punishment signals
and I love this example.
Well, maybe marching a little bit further
along this pathway,
visual input is combined
with balance input.
Where does that occur,
and maybe 'cause I have some
hint of where it occurs.
You could tell us a little bit
about this kind of
mysterious little mini-brain
that they call the cerebellum.
- Cerebellum, yeah.
So the way I tried to describe
the cerebellum to my students
is that, it serves sort of like
the air traffic control system
functions in air travel.
So that it's a system
that's very complicated
and it's really dependent
on great information.
So it's taking in information
about everything that's
happening everywhere
not only through your sensory systems,
but it's listening into
all the little centers
elsewhere in your brain
that are computing what
you're going to be doing next
and so forth.
So it's just ravenous for
that kind of information.
- So it really is like
a little mini-brain.
- It is, it's got access
to all those signals.
and it really has an
important role in coordinating
and shaping movements, but
if you suddenly eliminated
the air traffic control system,
planes could still take off and land
but you might have some unhappy
accidents in the process.
So the cerebellum is kind of like that.
It's not that you would be paralyzed
if your cerebellum was gone
because you still have motor neurons,
you still have ways to
talk to your muscles,
you still have reflex centers,
and it's not like you
would have any sensory laws
because you still have your cortex
getting all of those beautiful signals
that you can think about,
but you wouldn't be coordinating
things so well anymore.
The timing between input
and output might be off.
Or if you were trying to
practice a new athletic move
like an overhead serve in tennis,
you'd be just terrible at learning.
All the sequences of muscle movements
and the feedback from
your sensory apparatus
that would let you really
hit that ball exactly
where you wanted to
after the nth rep, right?
Now 1000th rep or something
you get much better at it.
So the cerebellum is all involved
in things like motor learning
and refining the precisions
of movement so that they
get you where you want to go
if you reach for a glass of champagne
that you don't knock
it over or stop short.
[indistinct]
- People who have selective
damage to the cerebellum.
- Absolutely.
- And I'm familiar with.
Well, Korsakoff's is different, right?
Isn't that a B vitamin
deficiency in chronic alcoholics?
- Right.
- And they tend to walk
kind of bow-legged and they
can't coordinate their movements.
That has some that not memory
bodies but also a cerebellum?
- I'm not sure about the
cerebellar involvement there.
But the typical thing would be a patient
who has a cerebral or stroke
or a tumor for example,
might be not that steady on their feet
if the dynamics of the
situation you're standing
on a street car with no
handle pull to hold on to,
they might not be as good at adjusting
all the little movements of the car.
There's a kind of tremor that can occur
as they're reaching for things,
because they reach a little too far
and then they over correct and
come back, things like that.
So it's very common neurological
phenomenon actually.
Cerebellar ataxia is what
the neurologists call it,
and it can happen not just
with cerebellar damage,
but damage to the tracts
that feed the information
into the cerebellum.
- Right, it is the private structure.
- Exactly, or output from the cerebellum.
- And so, the cerebellum
is where a lot of visual
and balance information is combined.
- In a very key place in the cerebellum,
which it's really one of the oldest parts.
- In terms of flocculus.
- The flocculus, right.
It's a critical place in
the cerebellum where visual
and vestibular information comes together
recording just the kinds of
movements we were talking about.
This image stabilizing network
it's all happening there.
And there's learning
happening there as well.
So that if your vestibular apparatus
is a little bit damaged somehow,
your visual system is actually
talking to your cerebellum
saying there's a problem
here, there's an error,
and your cerebellum is
learning to do better
by increasing the output
of the vestibular system
to compensate for whatever that loss was.
So it's a little error correction system
that's sort of typical
of a cerebellar function
and it can happen in many,
many different domains.
This is just one of the domains
of sensory motor integration
that takes place there.
- So I should stay off
my phone in the Ubers.
if I'm on a boat, I
should essentially look
and as much as possible act
as if I'm driving the machine.
- Right.
- That'd be weird
if I was in the passenger seat
pretending I was driving the machine.
But i do always feel better
if I'm sitting in the
front seat passenger.
- Right, so more of the
visual world that you can see
as if you were actually
the one doing the motion
I would think.
- Let's stay in the inner ear for a minute
as we continue to march
around the nervous system.
When you take off in the
plane or when you land
or sometimes in the middle of there,
your ears get clogged or at
least my ears get clogged,
that's because of pressure
buildup in the various tubes
of the inner ear, et
cetera, we'll get into this.
But years ago, our good
friend Harvey Karten,
is a another world-class neuroanatomist
gave a lecture and talked
about how plugging your nose
and blowing out versus plugging
your nose and sucking in
should be done at different times
depending on whether or not
you're taking off or landing.
And I always see people
trying to unpop their ears.
- Right.
- And when you do scuba diving
you learn how to do this
without necessarily I can do it
by just kind of moving my jaw now
'cause I've done a little bit of diving.
But what's the story there?
We don't have to get
into all the differences
in atmospheric pressure, et cetera,
but if I'm taking off
and my ears are plugged,
I've recently ascended, plane
take off, my ears are plugged,
do I plug my nose and blow out,
or do I plug my nose and suck in?
- Right, so the basic idea is that,
if your ears feel bad because
you're going into an area
of higher pressure, so if
they pressurize the cabin
more than the pressure that
you have on the surface
of the planet, your
eardrums will be bending in
and they don't like that.
If you push them more
they'll hurt even more.
- It's a good description
that the pressure goes up
then they're going to bend in.
- Bend in and then reverse would be true
if you go into an area of low pressure.
So if you knew you started
to drive up the mountain side
the pressure's getting
lower and lower outside,
now the air behind your
eardrum is ballooning out.
- Yep.
- Right?
So it's just a question
of are you trying to get more
pressure or less pressure
behind the eardrum and there's
a little tube that does that
and comes down into
back your throat there.
And if you force pressure up that tube,
you're going to be
putting more air pressure
into the compartment.
- To counter it.
- If it's not enough and if you're sucking
you're going the other way.
In reality, I think as long
as you open the passageway,
I think the pressure differential
is going to solve your problem.
So I think you could actually blow in
when you're not supposed to.
- Okay, so you could just hold
your nose and blow air out,
or hold your nose and suck in the.
- Right.
- Effect either way is fine?
- I think so.
- Excellent, I just won
$100 from Harvey Karten.
[laughs]
- Thank you very much, this is a lot.
Harvey and I used to teach
neuroanatomy together
and I was like I don't think it matters,
but thank you very much,
I'll split that with you.
- Okay.
[laughs]
- This is important stuff.
But it's true you hear this.
So it doesn't matter either way.
- I'm no expert in this area.
- Don't worry.
- Don't quote me.
- He's not going to, well,
I'm going to quote you.
But, okay, so we've talked
about the inner ear,
we've talked about the cerebellum.
I want to talk about an area of the brain
that is rarely discussed
which is the midbrain.
- Yeah.
- And for those that don't know,
the midbrain is an area
beneath the cortex.
I guess we never really defined cortex
was kind of the outer layers
or are the outer layers
of the at least mammalian
brain or human brain.
But the midbrain is super interesting,
because it controls a
lot of unconscious stuff,
reflexes, et cetera.
And then there's this phenomenon
even called blind sight.
So could you please tell
us about the midbrain
about what it does, and
what in the world is sight?
- Yeah, so there's a lot of pieces there.
I think the first thing to say is,
if you imagine the nervous
system in your mind's eye,
you see this big honking brain
and then there's this little wand
that dangles down into your
vertical column the spinal cord
and that's kind of your visual impression.
What you have to imagine is
starting in the spinal cord
and working your way up into
this big magnificent brain
and what you would do
as you enter the skull,
is get into a little place
where the spinal cord
kind of thickens out.
It still has that sort of long,
skinny trunk-like feeling.
- It's more like a
paddle or a spoon shape.
- Right, it starts to
spread out a little bit
and that's 'cause your evolutionists
packed more interesting goodies in there
for processing information
and generating movement.
So beyond that is this tween
brain we were talking about.
This linker brain with
diencephalon really means
the between brain.
- Oh, I thought you said tween.
- Well, it is, yes.
- No, no, no, between.
Between.
- Between.
[indistinct]
- You said tween.
- Yeah, it's the between,
it's the between brain
is what the name means.
It's the linker from the
spinal cord in the periphery
up to these grand centers of the cortex.
But this midbrain you're
talking about is the last bit
of this enlarged sort of spinal
cordy thing in your skull,
which is really the brain
stem is what we call it.
The last bit of that before
you get to this relay up
to the cortex is the midbrain.
And there's a really
important visual center there,
it's called the superior colliculus.
There's a similar center in the brains
of other vertebrate animals a
frog for example or a lizard,
would have this is called
the optic tectum there
but it's a center, then in
these non-mammalian vertebrates,
is really the main visual center.
They don't really have what
we would call a visual cortex
although there's something
sort of like that.
But this is where most of the action is
in terms of interpreting visual input
and organizing behavior around that.
You can sort of think about this region
of the brain stem as a reflex center
that can reorient the
animal's gaze or body
or maybe even attention to
particular regions of space
out there around the animal
and that could be for
all kinds of reasons.
It might be a predator just
showed up in one corner
of the forest and you pick that up
and you're trying to avoid it.
- Or just any movement.
- Any movement, right?
It might be that suddenly
something splats on the page
when you're reading a novel
and your eye reflexively looks at it.
You don't have to think
about that, that's a reflex.
- What if you throw me a ball
but I'm not expecting it?
- Right.
- And I just reach up
try and grab it touch it or not.
Is that handled by the midbrain?
- Well, that's probably not the midbrain
although by itself, because
it's going to involve
all these limb movements,
this movement of your arm and body.
- What about ducking
if something's suddenly
thrown in your head?
- Sure, right, things like that
will certainly have a brainstem component,
a midbrain component,
something looms and you duck.
It may not be the superior colliculus
we're talking about now,
it might be another part
of the visual midbrain.
But these are centers that emerged early
in the evolution of brains like ours
to handle complicated visual events
that have significance for the animal
in terms of space, where is it in space?
And in fact, this same center
actually gets input from all
kinds of other sensory systems
that take information
from the external world
from particular locations
and where you might want to
either avoid or approach things
according to their significance to you.
So you get input from the touch system,
you get input from the auditory system.
I work for a while in rattlesnakes,
they get input from a
part of their warm sensors
on their face, they're in
these little pits on the face.
- To work on baby rattlesnakes, right?
- They were adults.
- Oh, I wasn't trying
to diminish the danger.
I thought for some reason
they were little ones.
- No.
- Why in the world
would you work on rattlesnakes?
- Well, because they have a version
of an extra receptive sensory system
that is they're looking out into the world
using a completely
different set of sensors.
They're using the same sensors
that would feel the warmth on your face
if you stood in front of a bonfire.
Except, evolution has given them
this very nice specialized system
that lets them image where
the heat's coming from.
You can sort of do that anyway, right?
If you walk around the fire,
you can feel where the
fire is from the heat
hitting your face.
- Is that the primary way
in which they detect prey?
- It's one of one of the major ways.
And in fact, they use vision as well
and they bring these two systems together
in the same place in this tectum regions
brain stem, midbrain.
- What's the tongue jutting
about when the snakes?
- That I don't know.
That may be old factory, they're maybe.
- They're sniffing the
air with their tongue?
- Yeah, there may be, 'cause.
- On our drive you told me that
flies actually taste things
with their feet.
- They do, yeah.
- That's so weird.
- Yeah, they have taste receptors
and lots of funny places.
I want to pause here just for one second
before we get back into the midbrain.
I think what's so interesting
in all seriousness
about taste receptors
on feet, heat sensors,
tongues shutting out of snakes and vision
and all this integration is that,
it really speaks to the fact
that all these sensory neurons
are trying to gather information
and stuff it into a system
that can make meaningful
decisions and actions.
And that it really doesn't
matter whether or not
it's coming from eyes or ears
or nose or bottoms of feet,
because in the end, it's
just electricity flowing in.
And so it sounds like it's
placed on each animal,
it always feels weird
to call fly an animal.
But they are creatures, they are animals.
It's placed in different
locations on different animals
depending on the particular
needs of that animal.
- Right, but how much more powerful
if the nervous systems
can also cross-correlate
across sensory systems?
So if you've got a weak signal
from one sensory system,
you're not quite sure
there's something there.
And a weak signal from
an another sensory system
that's telling you the same locations
is a little bit interesting.
There might be something there
if you've got those two together
you've got corroboration.
Your brain now says it's much more likely
that that's going to be something
worth paying attention to.
- Right, so maybe I'm feeling some heat
on one side of my face
and I also smell something
baking in the oven.
- Right.
- So now there's,
it's neither is particularly
strong, but as you said,
there's some corroboration.
- Right.
And that corroboration
is occurring in the midbrain.
- Right, and then if you
throw things into conflict,
now the brain is confused
and that may be where your
emotion sickness comes from.
So it is great to have, as a brain,
it's great to have as many
sources of information
as you can have, just like if you're a spy
or a journalist, you don't
want as much information
as you can get about what's out there,
but if things conflict,
that's problematic, right?
Your sources are giving
you different information
about what's going on.
Now you've got a problem on
your hands, what do you publish?
- The midbrain is so fascinating.
I don't want to eject us from the midbrain
and go back to the vestibular system,
but I do have a question
that I forgot to ask
about the vestibular system which is,
why is it that for many
people including me,
despite my motion sickness in cabs,
that there's a sense of pleasure
in moving through space
and getting tilted relative
to the gravitational pull of the earth?
For me growing up it was skateboarding,
but people like to corner
in cars, corner on bikes,
maybe for some people it's
done running or dance.
But what is it about moving through space
and getting tilted a lot
of surfers around here.
Getting tilted that can tap
into some of the pleasure centers.
Do we have any idea why
that would feel like?
- I have no clue.
- Is there dopaminergic
input to this system?
- Well, the dopaminergic
system gets a lot of places.
It's pretty much to some
extent everywhere in the cortex
a lot more in the frontal lobe of course,
but that's just for starters.
There's basically dopaminergic
innervation most places
in the central nervous system.
So there's the potential for
dopamine urging involvement
but I really have no clue
about the tilting phenomenon.
- People pay money to
go on roller coasters.
- Right, well, I think that
may be as much about the thrill
as anything.
- Sure.
And the falling reflex is
very robust in all of us
when the visual world's going up very fast
it usually means that we're falling.
- Right.
- But some people like that,
some people don't.
- Right.
And kids tolerate a lot more
sort of vestibular craziness
spinning around until they've dropped.
- And I've friends, it always
you worries me a little bit
that they throw their kids.
I'm not recommending anyone do this.
When they're little like throwing the kids
really far back and forth,
some kids seem to love it.
- Yeah, yeah, our son loved
being shaken up and down
very vigorously, that's the only thing
that would calm him down sometimes.
- Interesting, yeah, so I'm guessing
we can guess that maybe
there's some activation
of the reward systems from.
- Yeah.
- Being moving through space.
- Well, if you think
about how rewarding it is
to be able to move through space
and how unhappy people
are who are used to that
who suddenly aren't able to do that,
there is a sense of agency, right?
If you can choose to move
through the world and to tilt,
that's not only you're
moving through the world,
but you're doing it with a
certain amount of finesse,
maybe that's what it is.
You can feel like you're the
master of your own movement
in a way that you wouldn't
if you're going straight.
I'm just blowing smoke here, right?
- Yeah, well, we can
speculate, that's fine.
I couldn't help but ask the question.
Okay, so if we move ourselves pun intended
back into the midbrain,
the midbrain is combining
all these different signals
for reflexive action.
At what point does this
become deliberate action?
Because if I look at something
I want and I want to pursue it,
I'm going to go toward it
and many times that's
a deliberate decision.
- Right, so this gets
very slippery I think,
because what you have to try to imagine
is all these different parts of the brain
working on the problem of staying alive
and surviving in the world,
they're working on the
problem simultaneously,
and there's not one right
answer how to do that.
But one way to think about it is that,
you have high levels
of your nervous system
that are very well designed to override
an otherwise automatic
movement if it's inappropriate.
So if you imagine you've been
invited to tea with the queen
and she hands you very fancy
Wedgewood teacup very thin.
- Wedgewood teacup?
- Yes, with very hot tea in it
and you're burning your hand,
you probably will try to find
a way to put that back down
on the saucer rather than
just dropping it on the floor
because you're with the queen.
You're trying to be appropriate to that.
So you have ways of reining
in automatic behaviors
if they're going to be maladaptive.
But you also want the
reflex to work quickly
if it's the only thing
that's going to save you.
The looming object coming at your head,
you don't have time to think about that.
So this is the interplay
in these hierarchically organized centers
of the nervous system at the lowest level.
You've got the automatic
sensors and centers
and reflex arcs that will keep you safe
even if you don't have
time to think about it,
and then you've got the
higher center saying,
well, maybe we could do this as well
or maybe we shouldn't
do that at all, right?
So you have all these different levels
operating simultaneously
and you need bi-directional communication
between high-level, cognitive centers,
decision-making on the one hand,
and these low-level very
helpful reflexive centers,
but they're a little bit
rigid, a little hard-wired
so they need some nuance.
So they're both of these
things are operating in tandem
in real time, all the time in our brains
and sometimes we listen
more to one than the other.
You've heard people in sports
talking about messing up
at the play 'cause they over thought it.
Thinking too hard about it.
That's partly you've already
trained your cerebellum
how to hit a fastball
right down the middle.
- Right, and if you start looking
for something new or different,
you're going to mess up
your reflexive swing.
- Right, if you're trying to think
about the physics of the
ball as it's coming at you,
you've already missed, right?
Because you're not using
your, all those reps
have built a kind of knowledge
is what you want to rely on
when you don't have enough
time to contemplate.
- This is important and a great segue
for what I'd like to discuss next
which is the basal ganglia.
This really interesting
of the area of the brain
that's involved in go-type commands
and behaviors instructing us to do things
and no-go preventing us from doing things.
Because so much of motor
learning and skill execution
and not saying the wrong thing
or sitting still in class
or as you use with the
tea with the queen example
feeling discomfort involves
suppressing behavior
and sometimes it's activating behavior.
- Right.
- A tremendous amount of online attention
is devoted to trying to
get people motivated.
This isn't the main focus of our podcast.
We touch on some of the
underlying neural circuits
of motivation dopamine and so forth.
But so much of what people
struggle with out there
are elements around
failure to pay attention.
- Right.
- Or challenges in paying attention
which is essentially like
putting the blinders on
and they're getting a soda
straw view of the world
and maintaining that for a about of work
or something of that sort and
trying to get into action.
So of course, this is carried
out by many neural circuits
not just the basal ganglia.
But what are the basal ganglia,
and what are their primary
roles in controlling
go type behavior and no-go type behavior?
- Yeah, so the basal
ganglia are sitting deep
in what you would call the forebrains
or the highest levels of the brain.
They are sort of cousins
to the cerebral cortex
which we talked about as
sort of the highest level
of your brain, the thing
you're thinking with.
- The cerebral cortex
being the refined cousins
and then you've got the.
- Right.
- The brute, yeah.
- Yeah.
That's probably totally unfair, but.
- That's right, I like the basal ganglia.
I can relate to the
brutish parts of the brain.
A little bit of hypothalamus,
a little bit of basal ganglia, sure.
- We need it all, we need it all.
And this area of the brain
has gotten a lot bigger
as the cortex has gotten bigger
and it's deeply intertwined
with cortical function.
The cortex can't really
do what it needs to do
without the help of the
basal ganglia and vice versa.
So they're really intertwined.
And in a way you can think
about this logically is saying,
if you have the ability
to withhold behavior
or to execute it, how do
you decide which to do?
Well, the cortex is going to
have to do that thinking for you.
You have to be looking
at all the contingencies
of your situation to decide
is this a crazy move,
or is this a really smart
investment right now or what?
- I don't want to go out
for a run in the morning,
but I'm going to make
myself go out for a run,
or I'm having a great time out on a run
and I know I need to get back
but I kind of want to go another mile.
- I mean, another great example is that,
the marshmallow test for the little kids.
They can get two
marshmallows if they hold off
just 30 seconds initially,
they can have one right away.
But if they can wait 30
seconds, they got two.
So that's the no go because
their cortex is saying,
I would really like to have
two more than having one.
But they're not going to get the two
unless they can not reach for the one.
So they've got to hold off the action
and that has to result
from a cognitive process.
So the cortex is involved
in this in a major way.
- Yeah, as I recall in that experiment,
the kids used a variety of tools.
Some would distract themselves.
I particularly related to the kid
that would just put himself
right next to the marshmallows
and then some of the
kids covered their eyes,
some of them would count or sing.
Yeah, so that's all very cortical, right?
Coming up with a novel strategy,
simple example that we're using here.
But of course, this is at
play anytime someone decides
they want to go watch
a motivational speech
or something just a Steve
Jobs commencement speech
just to get motivated
to engage in their day.
- Should I take this new job?
It's got great benefits,
but it's in a lousy part of the country.
- Why do you think that some
people have a harder time
running these go no-go circuits
and other people seem to have
very low activation energy
we would say, they could
just, they have a task,
they just lean into the task.
- Right.
- Whereas some people
getting into task completion
or things of that sort is
very challenging for them?
- Yeah, I think it's really just another,
it's a special case of a
very general phenomenon
which is brains are complicated.
And the brains we have
are the result of genetics
and experience, and my genes
are different from your genes
and my experiences are
different from your experiences.
So the things that would
be easy or hard for us
won't necessarily be aligned,
they might just happen to be
just because they are,
but the point is that,
you're dealt a certain set of cards,
you have certain set of
genes, you are handed a brain,
you don't choose your
brain it's handed to you.
Then there's all this
stuff you can do with it.
You can learn to have new
skills or to act differently
or to show more restraint
which is kind of relevant
to what we're talking about here.
Or maybe show less restraint
if your problem is
you're so buttoned down,
you never have any fun in life
and you should loosen up a little bit.
- Thank you, I appreciate that.
- Yeah.
[laughs]
David's always encouraging me
to have a little more fun in life.
[laughs]
So basil ganglia they're
kind of the disciplinarian
or they're sort of the instructor
conductor of sorts, right?
Go, no-go, you be quiet, you start now.
- I wish I knew more about
the basal ganglia than I do.
My sense is that, this system is key
for implementing the plans that
get cooked up in the cortex,
but they also influence the plans
that the cortex is dishing out
because this is a major source
of information to the cortex.
So it becomes almost
impossible to figure out
where the computation
begins and where it ends
and who's doing what
because these things are all interacting
in a complex network, and it's all of it.
It's the whole network,
it's not one is the leader
and the other is the follower.
- Right, of course, yeah,
these are all the structures
that we're discussing
are working in parallel.
- Right.
- And there's a lot of changing crosstalk.
I have this somewhat sick habit David.
Every day I try and do 21 no-gos.
So if I want to reach for my phone,
I try and not do it just to
see if I can prevent myself
from engaging in that
behavior, if it was reflexive,
if it's something I want
to do a deliberate choice,
then I certainly allow myself to do it.
- Right.
- I don't tend to have too
much trouble with motivation
with go type functions,
mostly because I'm so busy
that I'd wish I had more time
for more goes so to speak.
But do you think these circuits
have genuine plasticity in them?
- Absolutely, everybody
knows how they've learned
over time to wait for the
two marshmallows, right?
You don't have to have instant
gratification all the time.
You're willing to do a job
sometimes it isn't your favorite job
because it comes with the territory
and you want the salary that
comes at the end of the week
or the end of the month, right?
So we can defer gratification.
We can choose not to say the thing
that we know is going
to inflame our partner
and create a meltdown for the next week.
We learn this control,
but I think these are
skills like any other
you can get better at
them if you practice them.
So I think you're choosing
to do that to spontaneously,
is kind of a mental
practice, it's a discipline,
it's a way of building a
skill that you want to have.
- Yeah, I find it to be something
that when I engage in
a no-go type situation,
then the next time and the next time
that I find myself about
to move reflexively,
there's a little gap in consciousness
that I can make a decision whether or not
this is really the best use of my time.
Because sometimes I wonder
whether or not all this business
around attention certainly
there's the case of ADHD
and clinical diagnosed ADHD.
But all the issue around
focus and attention
is really that people just
have not really learned
how to short circuit a reflex.
And so much of what makes us
different than rattlesnakes,
or well, actually they
could be deliberate,
but from the other animals
and is our ability to suppress reflex.
- Yeah, well, that's the cortex.
Or let's say the forebrain.
Cortex and basal ganglia
are working together
sitting on top of this lizard brain
that's giving you all these
great adaptive reflexes
that help you survive.
You just hope you don't
get the surprising case
where the thing that your
reflex is telling you
is actually exactly the wrong thing
and you make a mistake, right?
[indistinct]
Right, so that's what the cortex is for.
It's adding nuance and
context and experience,
past association and in
human beings obviously,
learning from others
through communication.
- Well, I was, you went right to it
and it was where I was going to go.
So let's talk about the cortex.
We've worked our way up
the so-called neuraxis
as the aficionados will
know, so we're in the cortex.
This is the seat of our
higher consciousness,
self-image, planning and action.
But as you mentioned, the
cortex isn't just about that,
it's got other regions that
are involved in other things.
So maybe we should staying with vision,
let's talk a little bit
about visual cortex.
You told me an amazing
story about visual cortex
and it was somewhat of a sad story
unfortunately about
someone who had a stroke
to visual cortex.
Maybe if you would share that story
because I think it illustrates
many important principles
about what the cortex does.
- Right, so the visual cortex
you could say the projection screen.
The first place where
this information streaming
from the retina through this
thalamus connecting linker
gets played out for the highest
level of your brain to see.
It's a representation,
it's a map of things going
on in the visual world
that's in your brain.
And when we describe a scene to a friend,
we're using this chunk of our
brain to be able to put words
which are coming from a
different part of our cortex
to the objects and movements
and colors that we see
in the world.
So that's a key part of
your visual experience
when you can describe
the things you're seeing,
you're looking at your
visual cortex, and this is.
- Could I just ask a quick question?
So right now because I'm
looking at your face.
- Right.
- As we're talking,
there are neurons in my brain
more or less in the
configuration of your face
that are active as you move about.
And what if I were to close
my eyes and just imagine,
I do this all the time by the way David.
I close my eyes and i
imagine David Berson's face.
[laughs]
I don't tend to do that
as often, maybe I should.
But you get the point, I'm
now using visualization
of what you look like by way of memory.
- Right.
- If we were to image
the neurons in my brain,
would the activity of neurons
resemble the activity of
neurons that's present
when I open my eyes and
look at your actual face?
- This is a deep question,
we don't really have a full.
- It seems like.
[indistinct]
- Yes, except you're talking
about looking in detail
at the activity of
neurons in a human brain
and that's not as easy to do
as it would be in some
kind of animal model.
But the bottom line is that,
you have a spatial representation
of the visual world
late as a map of the visual world
lay down on the surface of your cortex.
The thing that's surprising is that,
it's not one map, it's
actually dozens of maps.
- What do each of those maps do?
- Well, we don't really have a
full accounting there either,
but it looks a little bit
like the diversification
of the output neurons of the retina,
the ganglion cells we
were talking about before.
There are different
types of ganglion cells
that are encoding different
kinds of information
about the visual world,
we talk about the ones that
were encoding the brightness.
but other ones are
encoding motion or color
these kinds of things, the
same kinds of specializations
in different representations
of the visual world
in the cortex seem to be true.
It's a complex story, we don't
have the whole picture yet,
but it does look as if
some parts of the brain
are much more important
for things like reaching for
things in the space around you.
And other parts of the
cortex are really important
for making associations between
particular visual things
you're looking at now
and their significance.
What is that object,
what can it do for me,
how can I use it?
- What about the really
specialized areas of cortex
like neurons that respond
to particular faces,
or neurons that I don't
know can help me understand
where I am relative to
some other specific object?
- Right, so these are
our properties of neurons
that are extracted from detected
by recording the activity
of single neurons in
some experimental system.
What's going on when you actually
perceive your grandmother's face,
is a much more complicated question
and it clearly involves
hundreds and thousands
and probably millions of neurons
acting in a cooperative way.
So you can pick out any one little element
in this very complicated system
and see that it's
responding differentially
to certain kinds of visual patterns
and you think you're seeing a glimpse
of some part of the process
by which you recognize
your grandmother's face.
But that's a long way from
a complete description
and it certainly isn't
going to be at the level
of a magic single neuron
that has the special stuff
to recognize your grandmother,
it's going to be in some pattern
of activity across many, many cells
resonating in some kind of special way
that will represent the
internal memory of your mother.
- So it's really incredible?
- Yeah.
- I mean that every time
we do this deep dive
which we do from time to time,
you and I we kind of like
march into the nervous system
and explore how different
aspects of our life experiences
is handled there and how it's organized.
After so many decades of doing this,
it still boggles my mind that
the collection of neurons
one through seven active
in a particular sequence
gives the memory of a particular face
and run backwards seven through to one,
it gives you a, it could be rattlesnake
pit viper heat sensing organs.
- Right.
- You were talking about earlier.
So it sounds,
is it true that there's
a lot of multi-purposing
of the circuitry, like we can't say
one area of the brain does A
and another area of the brain does B.
So areas can multitask
or have multiple jobs.
They can moonlight.
- Right, but I think in my career,
the hard problem has been to square that
with the fact that things are specialized
that there are specific genes expressed
in specific neurons that make
them make synaptic connections
with only certain other neurons.
And that particular synaptic arrangement
actually results in the
processing of information
that's useful to the
animal to survive, right?
So it's not as if it's either
a big undifferentiated network
of cells and looking at any one
is never going to tell you anything
that's too extreme on the one hand,
nor is it the case that
everything is hardwired
and every neuron has one function
and this all happens in
one place in the brain,
it's way more complicated and interactive
and interconnected than that.
- So we're not hardwired or soft-wired?
- Both.
- We're sort of,
I don't know what the analogy
should be what substance
would work best David?
- No idea there, but the idea is that,
it's always network activity.
There's always many, many neurons involved
and yet there's tremendous
specificity in the neurons
that might or might not be participating
in any distributed
function like that, right?
So you have to get your mind
around the fact that
it's both very specific
and very non-specific at the same time.
It's a little tricky to do,
but I think that's kind
of where the truth lies.
- Yeah, and so this example
that you mentioned to me
once before about a woman
who had a stroke in visual cortex,
I think it speaks to some of this.
- Right.
- Could you share with us that story?
- Sure, so the point is
that, all those of us who see
have representations of the visual world
in our visual cortex.
What happens to somebody
when they become blind
because of problems in the
eye, the retina perhaps?
You have a big chunk of the cortex,
this really valuable [indistinct]
for neural processing
that has come to expect
input from the visual system
and there isn't any anymore.
So you might think about
that as fallow land, right?
It's just used by the nervous system
and that would be a pity,
but it turns out that it is in fact used.
And the the case that you're
talking about is of a woman
who was blind from very early in her life
and who had risen through the ranks
to a very high level
executive secretarial position
in a major corporation.
And she was extremely
good at braille reading
and she had a braille typewriter
and that's how everything was done.
And apparently, she had a stroke
and was discovered at work,
collapsed and brought her to the hospital.
And apparently, the
neurologist who saw her
when she finally came to said,
"I've got good news and bad news."
Bad news is you've had a stroke,
the good news is that it
was in an area of your brain
you're not even using
it's your visual cortex
and I know you're blind from birth
so there shouldn't be any issue here."
The problem was, she lost
her ability to read braille.
So what appears to have been the case
and this has been confirmed in other ways
by imaging experiments in humans is that,
in people who are blind
from very early in birth,
the visual cortex gets repurposed
as a center for processing
tactile information.
And especially if you train
to be a good braille reader,
you're actually reallocating
somehow that real estate
to your fingertips.
A part of the cortex that
should be listening to the eyes.
So that's an extreme level of plasticity.
But what it shows, is the visual cortex
is kind of a general
purpose processing machine,
it's good at spatial information
and the skin of your fingers
is just another spatial sense
and deprived of any other input
the brain seems smart enough
if you want to put it
that way to rewire itself
to use that real estate
for something useful,
in this case, reading braille.
- Incredible, somewhat
tragic, but incredible.
At least in that case tragic, yeah.
- Very informative.
And of course it can go the other way too.
- Right.
- Where people can gain function
in particular modalities
like improved hearing or tactile function
in the absence of vision.
- Right.
- Tell us about connectomes,
we hear about genomes,
proteomes, microbiomes, ohms, ohms, ohms
these days.
- Yeah.
- What's a connectome
and why is it valuable?
- Yeah, so the connectome
actually now has two meanings.
So I'll only refer to one
that is my passion right now.
And that is really trying
to understand the structure
of nervous tissue at a scale
that's very, very fine.
- Smaller than a millimeter.
- Way smaller than a
millimeter, a nanometer or less,
as that's 1,000 times smaller,
or it's actually a million times smaller.
So really, really tiny
on the scale of individual synapses
between individual neurons
or even smaller like the
individual synaptic vesicles
containing little packets
of neurotransmitter
they're going to get it
released to allow one neuron
to communicate to the next.
So very, very fine, but
the notion here is that,
you're doing this section after
section at very fine scale.
So in theory what you have
is a complete description
of a chunk of nervous
tissue that is so complete
that if you took enough time to identify
where the boundaries of all the cells are,
you could come up with
a complete description
of the synaptic wiring of
that chunk of nervous tissue
because you have a complete description
of where all the cells are
and where all the synapses
between where all the cells are.
So now you essentially
have a wiring diagram
of this complicated piece of tissue.
So the omics part is
the exhaustiveness of it
rather than looking at
a couple of synapses
that are interesting to you
from two different cell types.
You're looking at all the
synapses of all of the cell types
which of course is this massive
avalanche of data, right?
- So in genetics, you have genetics
and then you have genomics
which is the idea of
getting the whole genome.
- All of it.
- And we don't really have an
analogous word for genetics,
but it would be connectivity
and [indistinct].
- Right.
[indistinct]
- Right, so it's wanting it all
and of course it's crazy ambitious,
but that's where it gets fun.
Really it's a use of electron microscopy,
a very high resolution
microscopic imaging system
on a new scale with way more payoff
in terms of understanding the connectivity
of the nervous system
and it's just emerging,
but I really think it's going
to revolutionize the field
because we're going to be
able to query these circuits
how do they actually do
it, look at the hardware
in a way that's never
been possible before.
- The the way that I
describe this to people
is if you were to take a
chunk of kind of cooked
but cold spaghetti.
- Right.
- And slice it up very thin
you're trying to connect up
each image of each slice of
the edge of the spaghetti
as figure out which ropes of spaghetti
belong to which.
- And have a complete description
of where this piece of spaghetti
touches that piece of spaghetti
is there's something
special there obviously.
- Meat sauces and all the other cell types
and the pesto where it all
is around the spaghetti
because those are the other
cells, the blood vessels
and the glial cells.
And so, what's it good for?
Maps are great, I always think
of connectomics and genomics
and proteomics, et cetera as necessary,
but not sufficient.
- Right.
Right, so I mean in many cases
what you do is you go out
and probe the function
and you understand how the
brain does the function
by finding neurons that seem to be firing
in association with this
function that you're observing.
And little by little
you're work your way in
and now you want to know
what the conductivity is
maybe the anatomy could help you.
But this connectomics approach
or at least the serial electron microscopy
reconstruction of neurons approach,
really is allowing us to frame questions
starting from the anatomy and saying,
I see a synaptic circuit here,
my prediction would be that
these cell types would interact
in a particular way, is that right?
And then you can go and
probe the physiology
and you might be right
or you might be wrong.
But more often than not,
it looks like the structure
is pointing us in the right direction.
So in my case, I'm using this
to try to understand a circuit
that is involved in this
image stabilization network
we're talking about, keeping
things stable on the retina
and this thing will only respond
at certain speeds of motion.
These cells in the circuit
like slow motion they won't
respond to fast motion,
how does that come about?
Well, I was able to probe the circuitry,
I knew what my cells looked like,
I could see which other
cells were talking to it,
I could categorize all the cells
that might be the players here
that are involved in this
mechanism of tuning the thing
for slow speeds,
and then we said it looks
like it's that cell type
and we went and looked
and the data bore that up.
But the anatomy drove the search
for the particular cell type
because we could see it
connected in the right place
to the right cells.
So creates the hypothesis
that lets you go query the physiology,
but it can go the other way as well.
So it's always the synergy
between these functional
and structural approaches
it gives you the most lift.
But in many cases,
the anatomy has been a little
bit the weak sister in this.
The structure trying
to work out the diagram
because we haven't had the methods.
Now the methods exist
and this whole field is
expanding very quickly,
because people want these circuit diagrams
for the particular part
of the nervous system
that they're working on.
If you don't know the cell
types and the connections,
how do you really understand
how the machine works?
- Yeah, what I love about is,
we don't know what we don't know.
- Right.
- And scientists we don't ask
questions, we pose hypotheses.
Hypotheses being of course some prediction
that you wager your time on basically.
- Right.
- And it either turns out
to be true or not true,
but if you don't know
that a particular cell type is there,
you could never in any
configuration of life or a career
or exploration of a nervous
system wager a hypothesis
because you didn't know it was there.
So this allows you to say ah,
there's a little interesting
little connection
between this cell that
I know is interesting
in another cell that's a little
mysterious but interesting,
I'm going to hypothesize
that it's doing blank,
blank and blank and go test that.
And in the absence of these connectomes,
you would never know that
that cell was lurking there
in the shadows.
- Right, right, yeah.
And if you're just trying to understand
how information flows through
this biological machine,
you want to know where things are.
Neurotransmitters are
dumped out of the terminals
of one cell and they
diffuse across the space
between the two cells which
is kind of a liquidy space
and they hit some receptors
on the postsynaptic cell
and they have some impact.
Sometimes that's not
through a regular synapse,
sometimes it's through a neuromodulator
like you often talk about on your podcast
that are sort of.
- Dopamine.
- Dopamine, exactly.
Oozing into the space between the cells
and it may be acting at some distance
far from where it was released, right?
But if you don't know where
the release is happening
and where other things
are that might respond to that release
you're groping around in the dark.
- Well, I love that you are doing this
and I have to share
with the listeners that,
the first time I ever met David
and every time I've ever
met with him in-person
at least at his laboratory at Brown,
he was in his office, door closed,
drawing neurons and their connections.
[laughs]
And this is somewhat unusual
for somebody who's a endowed
full professor or chairman
of the department et cetera for many years
to be doing the hands-on work.
Typically, that's the stuff
that's done by technicians
or graduate students or postdocs.
But I think it's fair to say
that you really love
looking at nervous systems
and drawing the accurate renditions
of how those nervous systems are organized
and thinking about how they work.
- Yeah, it's pure joy for me.
I mean, I'm a very visual
person, my wife is an artist,
we look a lot of art together
just the forms of things are
gorgeous in their own right.
But to know that the form
is in a sense the function
that the architecture of the connectivity
is how the computation happens
in the brain at some level
even though we don't fully
understand that in most contexts,
gives me great joy 'cause
I'm working on something
that's both visually beautiful
but also deeply beautiful
in a sort of a higher
sort of knowledge context,
what is it all about.
- I love it, well, as a final question,
I get asked very often about how people
should learn about neuroscience,
or how they should go about
pursuing maybe an education
in neuroscience if they're
at that stage of their life
or that's appropriate for
their current trajectory.
Do you have any advice to
young people, old people,
anything in between about how to learn
about the nervous system more
maybe in a more formal way?
I mean obviously, we have our podcast,
there are other sources of
neuroscience information
out there, but for the young person
who thinks they want to
understand the brain,
they want to learn about the
brain, what should we tell them?
- Well, that's a great question.
And there's so many sources out there.
It's almost a question
of how do you deal with this
avalanche of information
out there, I think your podcast
is a great way for people
to learn more about the nervous
system in an accessible way.
But there's so much stuff out there
and it's not just that.
I mean, the resources are
becoming more and more available
for average folks to participate
in neuroscience research
on some level.
There's this famous Eyewire
project of Sebastian.
- Oh yeah, maybe you let us about Eyewire.
- Yeah, so that's connectomics
and that's a situation
where a very clever scientist realized
that the physical work of
doing all this reconstruction
of neurons from these
electron micro-graphs,
there's a lot of time involved.
Many, many person hours
have to go into that
to come up with the map that you want
of where the cells are,
and he was very clever
about setting up a context
in which he could crowdsource this
and people who were interested
in getting a little experience
looking at nervous tissue
and participating in a research project
could learn how to do
this and do a little bit.
- From their living room.
- We'll put a link to Eyewire,
it also is a great bridge
between what we were just
talking about connectomics
and actually participating in research.
- Right.
- And you don't need a graduate mentor
or anything like that.
- Right.
So more of this is coming
and I'm actually interested
in building more of this
so that people who are interested,
want to participate at some level
don't necessarily have
the time or resources
to get involved in laboratory research
can get exposed to it and participate
and actually contribute, so
I think that's one thing.
I mean, just asking questions
of the people around you
who know a little bit more
and have them point you
in the right direction.
Here's a book you might like to read,
there's lots of great
popular books out there
that are accessible that
will give you some more sense
of the full range of what's
out there in the neurosciences.
- We can put some links to
a few of those that we like.
- Right.
- On basic neuroscience.
- Our good friend
Dick Masland, the late Richard,
people call him Dick
Masland had a good book.
I forget the title at the moment.
It's sitting behind me somewhere
over there on the shelf
about vision and how nervous systems work.
A pretty accessible book
for the general public.
- Right
- Yeah.
- Right, so that, and there's
so many sources out there.
I mean, Wikipedia is a great way.
If you have a particular
question about visual function,
I would say by all means,
head to Wikipedians
and get the first look
and follow the the references from there,
or go to your library,
or there's so many ways
to get into it, it's such
an exciting field now.
There's so many,
I mean, any particular
realm that's special to you,
your experience, your
strengths, your passions,
there's a field of
neuroscience devoted to that.
If you know somebody who's
got a neurological problem
or a psychiatric problem,
there's a branch of neuroscience
that is devoted to
trying to understand that
and to solve these kinds
of problems down the line.
So feel the buzz, it's an
exciting time to get involved.
- Great, those are great
resources that people can access
from anywhere zero-cost as you
need an internet connection.
But aside from that, we'll
put the links to some.
And I'm remembering,
Dick's book is called,
"We Know It When We See It."
- Right, one of my heroes.
- Yeah, a wonderful colleague
who unfortunately we lost a few years ago.
But listen David, this has been wonderful.
- It's been a blast.
- We really appreciate you
taking the time to do this
as people probably realize by now
you're an incredible wealth of knowledge
about the entire nervous system,
today we just hit this top contour
of a number of different areas
to give a flavor of the different ways
that the nervous system
works and is organized
and how that's put together,
how these areas are
talking to one another.
What I love about you
is that you're such an incredible educator
and I've taught so many
students over the years.
But also for me personally as friends,
but also any time that I want
to touch into the the beauty
of the nervous system, I
rarely lose touch with it.
But anytime I want to touch into it
and start thinking about new problems
and ways that the nervous
system is doing things
that I hadn't thought about, I call you.
So please forgive me for the
calls past, present and future
unless you change your number.
And even if you do, I'll be calling.
- It's been such a blast Andy.
This has been a great session
and it's always fun talking to you.
It always gets my brain
racing, so thank you.
- Thank you, thank you
for joining me today
for my discussion with Dr. David Berson.
By now, you should have a
much clearer understanding
of how the brain is
organized and how it works
to do all the incredible
things that it does.
If you're enjoying and/or
learning from this podcast,
please subscribe to our YouTube channel.
That's a terrific zero-cost
way to support us.
In addition, please
subscribe to our podcast
on Apple and Spotify.
And on Apple, you have the opportunity
to leave us up to a five-star review.
As well if you'd like to make suggestions
for future podcast episode topics,
or future podcast episode guests,
please put those in the comments section
on our YouTube channel.
Please also check out our sponsors
mentioned at the
beginning of each podcast.
That's the best way to support us.
And we have a Patreon, it's
patreon.com/andrewhuberman.
There you can support us
at any level that you like.
While today's discussion did
not focus on supplements,
many previous podcast episodes
include discussions about supplements.
And while supplements aren't
necessary for everybody,
many people derive benefit
from them for things like sleep
or focus or anxiety relief and so on.
One issue with the
supplement industry however,
is that oftentimes the quality
will really vary across brands.
That's why we partnered
with Thorne, T-H-O-R-N-E,
because Thorne supplements
are of the absolute highest standards
in terms of the quality of
the ingredients that include
and the precision of the
amounts of the ingredients
they include, in other words,
what's listed on the bottle,
is what's actually found in the bottle,
which is not true of many
supplements out there
that have been tested.
If you'd like to see the
supplements that I take,
you can go to thorne.com/u/huberman,
and there you can see the
supplements that I take
and you can get 20% off
any of those supplements.
And if you navigate deeper
into the Thorne site
through that portal thorne.com/u/huberman,
you can also get 20% off
any of the other supplements
that Thorne happens to make.
If you're not already
following Huberman Lab
on Instagram and Twitter,
feel free to do so.
Both places I regularly
post short video posts,
or text posts that give
tools related to health
and neuroscience and so forth.
And most of the time,
that information is non-overlapping
with the information
on the podcast.
Again, it's just Huberman
Lab on Instagram and Twitter.
And last but not least,
thank you for your interest in science.
[upbeat music]